---
author: Kelly Caylor
author-tags:
- Kelly Caylor
date: 2002-04-01 19:40:32
excerpt: 'Otter, L.B., R.J. Scholes, P.R. Dowty, J. Privette, K.K. Caylor, S. Ringrose,
  M. Mukelabai, P. Frost, N. Hanan, O. Totolo, and E.M. Veenendaal (2002) “The Southern
  African Regional Science Initiative (SAFARI 2000): Wet season campaigns.” South
  Africa Journal of Science, 98(3/4):131-140.'
header:
  teaser: assets/images/publications/Caylor2002_1384.png
id: 1384
portfolio-item-category:
- publications
portfolio-item-tag:
- '2002'
- SAJS
title: 'The Southern African Regional Science Initiative (SAFARI 2000): Wet season
  campaigns'
year: '2002'
---

{% include publication-feature-image.html canonical_id="Caylor2002_1384" %}

> Otter, L.B., R.J. Scholes, P.R. Dowty, J. Privette, **K.K. Caylor**, S. Ringrose, M. Mukelabai, P. Frost, N. Hanan, O. Totolo, and E.M. Veenendaal (2002) “The Southern African Regional Science Initiative (SAFARI 2000): Wet season campaigns.” South Africa Journal of Science, 98(3/4):131-140.

**Abstract**: … During sampling campaigns over Brazil, signals characteristic of biomass burning were found over the Atlantic Ocean, upwind of the continent.Likewise, atmospheric studies focusing …


The Southern African Regional Science Initiative (SAFARI 2000) involved two wet season and one dry season field campaigns. This paper reports on the wet season campaigns. The first was conducted at five sites along the Kalahari Transect in Zambia (Kataba Forest) and Botswana (Pandamatenga, Maun, Okwa River Crossing, Tshane) during February 2000 and concentrated primarily on characterizing the land surface with respect to exchanges of matter and energy with the atmosphere. The second, conducted in February 2001, focused on fluxes of water, gases and energy between the canopy and the atmosphere at Maun, Botswana, and at Skukuza in the Kruger National Park, South Africa. Eddy covariance measurements at Skukuza and Maun were designed to collect a near-continuous record of the seasonality and inter-annual variability in savanna carbon, water and energy exchanges in representative savanna ecosystems. This paper gives brief descriptions of the sites, the measurements made, and the methods used. It highlights some preliminary results, particularly from the first campaign, and outlines the next stages of the SAFARI 2000 project.


[Read the Article]({{ "assets/pdfs/publications/2002-Otter1.pdf" | absolute_url }}){: .btn .btn--success}