---
author: Kelly Caylor
author-tags:
- Kelly Caylor
date: 2005-01-11 20:41:28
doi: 10.1016/j.advwatres.2004.10.014
excerpt: 'Scanlon, T.M., K.K. Caylor, S. Manfreda, S. Levin, I. Rodriguez-Iturbe (2005)
  “Dynamic response of grass cover to rainfall variability: Implications for the function
  and persistence of savanna ecosystems” Advances in Water Resources, 28(3):291-301.'
header:
  teaser: assets/images/publications/Caylor2005_1467.png
id: 1467
portfolio-item-category:
- publications
portfolio-item-tag:
- '2005'
- Advances in Water Resources
title: 'Dynamic response of grass cover to rainfall variability: Implications for
  the function and persistence of savanna ecosystems'
year: '2005'
---

{% include publication-feature-image.html canonical_id="Caylor2005_1467" %}

> Scanlon, T.M., **K.K. Caylor**, S. Manfreda, S. Levin, I. Rodriguez-Iturbe (2005) “Dynamic response of grass cover to rainfall variability: Implications for the function and persistence of savanna ecosystems” Advances in Water Resources, 28(3):291-301.

**Abstract**: Savanna grass cover is dynamic and its annual extent resonates with wet season rainfall, as shown by satellite observations of normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) time series for the Kalahari Transect (KT) in southern Africa. We explore the hydrological significance of the dynamic grass cover by applying a soil moisture model to the water-limited portion of the KT, which spans a north-south gradient in mean wet season rainfall, r¯, from approximately 700 to 300 mm. Satellite-derived tree fractional cover, xt, is shown to be highly correlated with ground meteorological measurements of r¯(R2=0.94) in this region. By implementing a simple expression for grass growth and decay in the model that factored in only xt and near-surface soil moisture, we were able to effectively reproduce the satellite-derived fractional grass cover, xg, along the transect over a 16-year period (1983–1998). We compared the results from dynamic grass model with those yielded by a static grass cover model in which xg was set to its 16-year average for each simulation. The dynamic quality of the grass was found to be important for reducing tree stress during dry years and for reducing the amount of water that is lost from the overall root zone during the wet years, relative to the static grass case. We find that the dynamic grass cover acts as a buffer against variability in wet season precipitation, and in doing so helps to maximize ecosystem water use. The model results indicate that mixed tree/grass savanna ecosystems are ideally suited to reach a dynamic equilibrium with respect to the use of a fluctuating limiting resource (water) by having functional components that respond to variability in rainfall over long timescales (trees) and short timescales (grasses).


A coupled energy and water balance model is used to simulate the effects of large tree canopies on soil moisture and water stress across a series of sites spanning a regional moisture gradient in southern Africa. The model tracks evapotranspiration from five components of the land surface at each site-the tree canopy, the grass under and between tree canopies, and the bare soil under and between tree canopies. The soil moisture dynamics are simulated at daily time steps and driven by a stochastic model of storm arrivals and storm depth. Evapotranspiration is modeled using the Priestley-Taylor approach, with potential evapotranspiration scaled by soil moisture availability. 

The soil moisture under tree canopies is compared to the soil moisture between tree canopies, and differences in average annual soil moisture stress conditions are analyzed at each site. The spatial distribution of large trees has important consequences for small-scale soil moisture dynamics across the rainfall gradient. The results indicate that tree canopies serve to reduce soil moisture stress of under-canopy vegetation in the middle of the rainfall gradient. At the dry end of the rainfall gradient, the effect of tree canopies on soil moisture is dependent on the amount of rainfall received in a given growing season.


[Go to the Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2004.10.014){: .btn .btn--success} [Read the Article]({{ "assets/pdfs/publications/Advances-in-Water-Resources-2005-Scanlon1.pdf" | absolute_url }}){: .btn .btn--success}