---
author: Kelly Caylor
author-tags:
- Kelly Caylor
- Lyndon Estes
date: 2020-05-27 10:06:00
doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2019.05.011
excerpt: 'Giroux, S.A., et al. (2019) A high-frequency mobile phone data collection
  approach for research in social-environmental systems: Applications in climate variability
  and food security in sub-Saharan Africa, Environmental Modeling & Software, doi:j.envsoft.2019.05.011'
header:
  teaser: assets/images/publications/Caylor2019_4685.png
id: 4685
portfolio-item-category:
- publications
portfolio-item-tag:
- '2019'
- Environmental Modeling & Software
title: 'A high-frequency mobile phone data collection approach for research in social-environmental
  systems: Applications in climate variability and food security in sub-Saharan Africa'
year: '2019'
---

{% include publication-feature-image.html canonical_id="Caylor2019_4685" %}


> Giroux, S.A., et al. (2019) “A high-frequency mobile phone data collection approach for research in social-environmental systems: Applications in climate variability and food security in sub-Saharan Africa”, Environmental Modeling & Software, doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2019.05.011.


**Abstract**:Collecting high-frequency social-environmental data about farming practices in sub-Saharan Africa can provide new insight into environmental changes that farmers face and how they respond within smallholder agro-ecosystems. Traditional data collection methods such as agricultural censuses are costly and not useful for understanding intra-annual and real-time decisions. Short-message service (SMS) has the potential to transform the nature of data collection in coupled social-ecological systems. We present a system for collecting, managing, and synthesizing weekly data from farmers, including data infrastructure for management of big and heterogeneous datasets; probabilistic data quality assessment tools; and visualization and analysis tools such as mapping and regression techniques. We discuss limitations of collecting social-environmental data via SMS and data integration challenges that arise when linking these data with other social and environmental data. In combination with high-frequency environmental data, such data will help ameliorate issues of scale mismatch and build resilience in environmental systems.


[Go to the Article](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1364815218303207){: .btn .btn--success}