---
author: Kelly Caylor
author-tags:
- Kelly Caylor
- others?
date: 2019-04-22 10:35:07
doi: 10.1038/sdata.2018.302
excerpt: Wei, Z., et al. (2019) A global database of water vapor isotopes measured
  with high temporal resolution infrared laser spectroscopy, Scientific Data, doi:10.1038/sdata.2018.302
header:
  teaser: assets/images/publications/Caylor2019_6892.png
id: 6892
portfolio-item-category:
- publications
portfolio-item-tag:
- '2019'
- Scientific Data
title: A global database of water vapor isotopes measured with high temporal resolution
  infrared laser spectroscopy
year: '2019'
---

{% include publication-feature-image.html canonical_id="Caylor2019_6892" %}


> Wei, Z., et al. (2019) “A global database of water vapor isotopes measured with high temporal resolution infrared laser spectroscopy”, Scientific Data, doi:10.1038/sdata.2018.302.


**Abstract**:
The isotopic composition of water vapour provides integrated perspectives on the hydrological histories of air masses and has been widely used for tracing physical processes in hydrological and climatic studies. Over the last two decades, the infrared laser spectroscopy technique has been used to measure the isotopic composition of water vapour near the Earth’s surface. Here, we have assembled a global database of high temporal resolution stable water vapour isotope ratios (δ18O and δD) observed using this measurement technique. As of March 2018, the database includes data collected at 35 sites in 15 Köppen climate zones from the years 2004 to 2017. The key variables in each dataset are hourly values of δ18O and δD in atmospheric water vapour. To support interpretation of the isotopologue data, synchronized time series of standard meteorological variables from in situ observations and ERA5 reanalyses are also provided. This database is intended to serve as a centralized platform allowing researchers to share their vapour isotope datasets, thus facilitating investigations that transcend disciplinary and geographic boundaries.


[Go to the Article](https://www.nature.com/articles/sdata2018302){: .btn .btn--success}