---
author: Lyndon Estes
author-tags:
- Lyndon Estes
- Kelly Caylor
- Stephanie Debats
date: 2017-09-11 13:35:27
doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2016.01.011
excerpt: Estes, R., et al. (2016) A platform for crowdsourcing the creation of representative,
  accurate landcover maps, Environmental Modelling & Software, doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2016.01.011
header:
  teaser: assets/images/publications/Estes2016_2467.png
id: 2467
portfolio-item-category:
- publications
portfolio-item-tag:
- '2016'
- Environmental Modelling & Software
title: A platform for crowdsourcing the creation of representative, accurate landcover
  maps
year: '2016'
---

{% include publication-feature-image.html canonical_id="Estes2016_2467" %}


> Estes, R., et al. (2016) “A platform for crowdsourcing the creation of representative, accurate landcover maps”, Environmental Modelling & Software, doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2016.01.011.


**Abstract**:Accurate landcover maps are fundamental to understanding socio-economic and environmental patterns and processes, but existing datasets contain substantial errors. Crowdsourcing map creation may substantially improve accuracy, particularly for discrete cover types, but the quality and representativeness of crowdsourced data is hard to verify. We present an open-sourced platform, DIYlandcover, that serves representative samples of high resolution imagery to an online job market, where workers delineate individual landcover features of interest. Worker mapping skill is frequently assessed, providing estimates of overall map accuracy and a basis for performance-based payments. A trial of DIYlandcover showed that novice workers delineated South African cropland with 91% accuracy, exceeding the accuracy of current generation global landcover products, while capturing important geometric data. A scaling-up assessment suggests the possibility of developing an Africa-wide vector-based dataset of croplands for $2–3 million within 1.2–3.8 years. DIYlandcover can be readily adapted to map other discrete cover types.


[Go to the Article](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2016.01.011){: .btn .btn--success}