---
author: Lizzie King
author-tags:
- Lizzie King
- Kelly Caylor
date: 2010-06-04 23:06:38
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2010.03286.x
excerpt: 'King, E.G., Caylor, K.K. (2010) “Herbivores and mutualistic ants interact
  to modify tree photosynthesis,” New Phytologist, 187, p17-21, doi: 10.1111/ j.1469-8137.2010.03286.x.'
header:
  teaser: assets/images/publications/King2010_1629.png
id: 1629
portfolio-item-category:
- publications
portfolio-item-tag:
- '2010'
- GRL
title: Herbivores and mutualistic ants interact to modify tree photosynthesis
year: '2010'
---

{% include publication-feature-image.html canonical_id="King2010_1629" %}

> *King, E.G., **Caylor, K.K.** (2010) “Herbivores and mutualistic ants interact to modify tree photosynthesis,” New Phytologist, 187, p17-21, doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2010.03286.x.

**Abstract**: In the arms race between plants and herbivores, plants have evolved a variety of strategies to reduce the fitness costs of herbivore damage by investing resources in defense com-pounds and structures. Because both herbivore damage and defense investments are costly in terms of plant's resources, tradeoffs have emerged as a central theme in the evolutionary ecology of plant responses to herbivory, shaping the extent and the forms of defense that plants evolve (Coley et ai, 1985; van der Meijden et al, 1988). While under-standing allocation tradeoffs has fuelled prolific research and debate (Nuñez-Farfan et al, 2007), empirical studies have not generated consistent support for tradeoff-based arguments. Plant physiology research, which focuses on resource acquisition and metabolic processes upstream of phenotypic plant defense traits, offers an under-explored perspective that may yield deeper insights into costs and allocation patterns of plant defense. Several studies have demonstrated that herbivory can trigger increases in leaf-level photosynthetic rates (Welter, 1989; Trumble et al., 1993; Thomson et al, 2003). For plants that utilize carbon-based defense strategies, this photosynthetic up-regulation has the important consequence of increasing the available pool of carbohydrates that can potentially be allocated to defense. Such varying rates of carbon assimilation fundamentally change the playing field for evaluating the costs of defense investments. Plants employ three main strategies to mitigate the costs of herbivory: resistance, indirect defense and tolerance (Karban & Baldwin, 1997). Resistance strategies, such as thorns and noxious chemicals, and indirect defenses, whereby plants attract enemies of herbivores, both reduce damage to plants by decreasing the rates of herbivore attack. Tolerance strategies, by contrast, reduce the fitness cost of herbivory by allocating more resources to growth in order to replace lost tissue. Acacia drepanolobium, a dominant tree through much of East Africa's savannas, exhibits inducible carbon-based investments in all three classes of defense strategies. In response to herbivory, trees allocate photosynthate to produce longer and more numerous spines, which deter mammalian browsers (resistance strategy)(Young, 1987; Young et al, 2003). Herbivory can also stimulate increased rates of leaf and shoot growth (tolerance strategy)(Huntzinger et al, 2004). Finally, A. drepanolobium trees provide inducible extrafloral nectar and bulbous hollow thorns as food and housing for resident ants, which in turn help to protect trees from herbivory (indirect defense strat-egy)(Madden & Young, 1992; Stapley, 1998). In the savannas of Laikipia District in northern Kenya, nearly every A. drepanolobium tree {c. 100% of trees> 1 m tall) is occupied by one of four mutually exclusive ant species, with ant species turnover rates of c. 15% yr" 1 (Palmer et al, 2000). Each ant species exhibits its own suite of distinctive behaviours towards its tree host (Young et al, 1997; Palmer et al, 2000). Crematogaster mimosae behaves as a faithful mutualist, forming dense populations, recruiting aggressively to attack browsers and patrolling to remove insect herbivores (Young et al, 1997). Crematogaster nigriceps also defends strongly against herbivory, with dense colonies and an aggressive response to browsers and insects (Palmer & Brody, 2007), but these ants eat and destroy most of the host trees' axillary and terminal shoots (Stan ton et al, 1999). The two other ant species, Crematogaster sjostedti and Tetraponera penzigi, offer little, if any, mutualistic benefit to their host trees; they defend weakly against mammalian browsers and ignore or …


In the arms race between plants and herbivores, plants have evolved a variety of strategies to reduce the fitness costs of herbivore damage by investing resources in defense compounds and structures. Because both herbivore damage and defense investments are costly in terms of plant’s resources, tradeoffs have emerged as a central theme in the evolutionary ecology of plant responses to herbivory, shaping the extent and the forms of defense that plants evolve (Coley et al., 1985; van der Meijden et al., 1988). Several studies have demonstrated that herbivory can trigger increases in leaf-level photosynthetic rates (Welter, 1989; Trumble et al., 1993; Thomson et al., 2003). For plants that utilize carbon-based defense strategies, this photosynthetic up-regulation has the important consequence of increasing the available pool of carbohydrates that can potentially be allocated to defense. Such varying rates of carbon assimilation fundamentally change the playing field for evaluating the costs of defense investments. Here we investigate for the first time whether interactions with browsers and resident ants also modulate leaf-level photosynthetic rates, thereby affecting available carbon pools and metabolic pathways to induced defenses. The key finding of this study is that A. drepanolobium trees exhibit elevated photosynthetic rates in response to browsing only when occupied by strongly mutualistic ants. We discuss key implications of this novel result in the context of previous studies of defense expression in this system, as well as studies of induced variation in photosynthetic rates in other systems.


[Go to the Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2010.03286.x){: .btn .btn--success} [Read the Article]({{ "assets/pdfs/publications/New-Phytol-2010-King1.pdf" | absolute_url }}){: .btn .btn--success}