---
author: Natasha Krell
author-tags:
- Natasha Krell
- Kelly Caylor
date: 2020-04-10 00:00:01
doi: 10.1080/17565529.2020.1748847
excerpt: Krell N.T., Giroux S.A., Guido, Z., Hannah, C., Lopus S., Caylor, K.K., and
  T.P. Evans (2020) Smallholder farmers' use of mobile phone services in central Kenya,
  Climate and Development, doi:10.1080/ 17565529.2020.1748847
header:
  teaser: assets/images/publications/Krell2020_6241.png
id: 6241
portfolio-item-category:
- publications
portfolio-item-tag:
- '2020'
- Climate and Development
- Kenya
title: Smallholder farmers' use of mobile phone services in central Kenya
year: '2020'
---

{% include publication-feature-image.html canonical_id="Krell2020_6241" %}


> Krell N.T., Giroux S.A., Guido, Z., Hannah, C., Lopus S., Caylor, K.K., and T.P. Evans (2020) Smallholder farmers' use of mobile phone services in central Kenya, Climate and Development, doi:10.1080/17565529.2020.1748847


**Abstract**:Information and services delivered through mobile phones, ‘m-services', have transformative potential to provide rural African farmers with important agro-meteorological information. However, a greater understanding is needed regarding the types of m-services available to farmers, how farmers access that information, and possible factors affecting m-service use. With a study of smallholder farming communities in central Kenya, we examine factors affecting the likelihood of Kenyan farmers’ adoption of m-services specifically related to agriculture and livestock information, buying and selling products, and alerts about agricultural or livestock activities. According to a survey of 577 farming households, 98% of respondents own a mobile phone. Approximately 25% use it to access information about agriculture and livestock, 23% access information about buying and selling products, and 18% receive alerts. Personal smartphone ownership increases the likelihood of m-services use (p < .001), as does membership in farmer organizations (p < .001). We find that age and income are not significantly related to m-service use, and we discuss this result in terms of intersections between smartphone ownership, gender, and education. Consistent with prior qualitative research, our quantitative results further support the need for m-services providers to design for basic or feature phone users for improved dissemination of agro-meteorological information.

[Go to the Article](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/17565529.2020.1748847){: .btn .btn--success}