---
author: Cascade Tuholske
author-tags:
- Cascade Tuholske
- Kelly Caylor
date: 2021-10-08 13:40:15
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2024792118
excerpt: Tuholske, C. et al. (2021) Global urban population exposure to extreme heat.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, doi:10.1073/pnas.2024792118
header:
  teaser: assets/images/publications/Tuholske2021_7248.png
id: 1248
portfolio-item-category:
- publications
portfolio-item-tag:
- '2021'
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
title: Global urban population exposure to extreme heat
year: '2021'
---

{% include publication-feature-image.html canonical_id="Tuholske2021_7248" %}


> Tuholske, C., Caylor, K.K., Funk, C. , Verdin, A. , Sweeney, S., Grace, K., Peterson, P., Evans, T.(2021) Global urban population exposure to extreme heat. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 10.1073/pnas.2024792118


**Abstract**:Increased exposure to extreme heat from both climate change and the urban heat island effect—total urban warming—threatens the sustainability of rapidly growing urban settlements worldwide.
Extreme heat exposure is highly unequal and severely impacts the urban poor. While previous studies have quantified global exposure to extreme heat, the lack of a globally accurate, fine-resolution
temporal analysis of urban exposure crucially limits our ability to deploy adaptations. Here, we estimate daily urban population exposure to extreme heat for 13,115 urban settlements from 1983 to 2016. We
harmonize global, fine-resolution (0.05°), daily temperature maxima and relative humidity estimates with geolocated and longitudinal global urban population data. We measure the average annual rate of
increase in exposure (person-days/year−1) at the global, regional, national, and municipality levels, separating the contribution to exposure trajectories from urban population growth versus total urban
warming. Using a daily maximum wet bulb globe temperature threshold of 30 °C, global exposure increased nearly 200% from 1983 to 2016. Total urban warming elevated the annual increase in exposure by 52%
compared to urban population growth alone. Exposure trajectories increased for 46% of urban settlements, which together in 2016 comprised 23% of the planet’s population (1.7 billion people). However, how
total urban warming and pop- ulation growth drove exposure trajectories is spatially heterogeneous. This study reinforces the importance of employing multiple extreme heat exposure metrics to identify
local patterns and compare exposure trends across geographies. Our results suggest that previous research underestimates extreme heat exposure, highlighting the urgency for targeted adaptations and early
warning systems to reduce harm from urban extreme heat exposure.


[Go to the Article](https://www.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2024792118){: .btn .btn--success}